# Retail & Consumer: AI Reinventing Shopping and Lifestyle

The Middle East's retail and consumer markets are undergoing rapid
transformation, with AI at the core of how businesses engage,
personalise, and serve their customers. With one of the world's youngest
and most connected populations, the GCC is becoming a testbed for
AI-driven retail innovation.

### UAE: Smart Stores and Personalisation

Majid Al Futtaim (MAF), operator of Carrefour and Mall of the Emirates,
has deployed AI across its retail ecosystem. AI-powered demand
forecasting tools optimise inventory for thousands of SKUs, reducing
waste and improving availability. Computer vision systems are being used
in smart stores to enable cashierless checkouts, similar to Amazon Go in
the US.

E-commerce platforms like Noon and Amazon.ae are integrating AI-driven
recommendation engines, boosting conversion rates and basket sizes. With
**90%+ internet penetration** in the UAE, personalised digital shopping
journeys are now standard.

### Saudi Arabia: Vision 2030 and the Consumer Economy

Saudi Arabia's Vision 2030 includes ambitious retail modernisation
goals. AI is being applied in customer analytics, helping retailers
understand shifting consumer preferences in a country where **70% of the
population is under 35**. Al Nahdi Medical Company, one of the Kingdom's
largest retail pharmacy chains, uses AI to manage supply chains and
anticipate demand spikes for critical medicines.

E-commerce penetration is accelerating, with platforms like Jahez (food
delivery) and HungerStation leveraging AI to optimise delivery routes,
cutting costs and improving customer satisfaction. AI-powered chatbots
are becoming a standard feature across leading Saudi retailers for
customer service at scale.

### Fashion, Luxury, and Lifestyle

Luxury brands see the Middle East as a key growth market and are
increasingly deploying AI for hyper-personalisation. Chalhoub Group has
piloted AI styling assistants that recommend outfits based on customer
profiles and regional fashion trends. Virtual try-on technologies,
powered by AR and AI, are being rolled out in beauty and fashion retail,
driving higher engagement and online sales.

In travel retail, Dubai Duty Free is exploring AI to optimise promotions
based on passenger flows and spending patterns. With Dubai International
Airport being the world's busiest for international passengers, even
small AI-driven improvements can yield significant revenue gains.

### Food & Beverage

AI is also changing how people dine. Delivery apps use machine learning
to predict demand surges during peak hours like Ramadan iftars,
optimising driver allocation. AI-powered menu engineering tools help
restaurants identify best-selling items and price dynamically. Starbucks
MENA has rolled out AI-enabled loyalty programmes, tailoring offers to
millions of customers in real time.

### Challenges

Despite strong growth, challenges remain. Legacy POS systems and
fragmented consumer data make it difficult for retailers to deliver
seamless AI-driven experiences. Data privacy regulations, especially
around personalised marketing, are tightening. Talent shortages in AI,
particularly in retail analytics, continue to slow adoption for SMEs
compared to large retail groups.

### What's Next

-   Growth of **AI-driven cashierless stores** across malls and
    supermarkets.
-   Expansion of **AI-powered loyalty ecosystems** across travel,
    retail, and F&B sectors.
-   Deployment of **generative AI in e-commerce**, creating personalised
    product descriptions, images, and even custom designs on demand.
-   Increased use of **AI in sustainability**, reducing food waste and
    optimising energy usage in malls and supply chains.

**Key takeaway:** Retail in the Middle East is shifting from
transactional to hyper-personalised and experiential, powered by AI
across every touchpoint.
