# Transportation & Mobility: AI Moving People and Goods

The Middle East is a global logistics and travel hub, making
transportation and mobility a natural proving ground for AI innovation.
From ports and airlines to autonomous taxis and smart logistics
corridors, governments and companies are embedding AI into how people
and goods move across the region.

### Aviation and Airlines

The UAE and Qatar operate two of the world's busiest global airlines ---
Emirates and Qatar Airways --- both of which are adopting AI to improve
efficiency and passenger experience. Emirates uses AI for predictive
maintenance on its fleet, reducing downtime and saving millions
annually. AI-driven chatbots and booking assistants now handle a
significant share of customer queries, freeing staff for higher-value
interactions.

Qatar Airways integrates AI to optimise fuel consumption and flight
routing, cutting costs and emissions. AI is also being tested for
real-time luggage tracking and automated customer service in airports.

### Autonomous Mobility

Dubai has announced plans for **25% of all transport to be autonomous by
2030**. The Roads and Transport Authority (RTA) is piloting AI-powered
robo-taxis in partnership with Cruise (a GM subsidiary). These vehicles
are currently being tested in Jumeirah and Downtown Dubai, making the
city one of the first globally to trial autonomous ride-hailing at
scale.

Saudi Arabia's NEOM project is designing mobility from scratch, with no
traditional cars. Instead, AI-powered autonomous pods, drones, and
high-speed transit systems will move residents seamlessly. NEOM's Oxagon
port will use AI for logistics automation, predictive shipping, and
customs clearance.

### Ports and Logistics

Dubai's DP World, one of the world's largest port operators, uses AI and
IoT to manage Jebel Ali Port, which handles over **13 million TEUs
annually**. AI algorithms optimise crane movements, container stacking,
and customs inspection, reducing turnaround times by up to 30%.

In Saudi Arabia, the King Abdulaziz Port in Dammam is trialling
AI-enabled predictive logistics to forecast congestion and streamline
cargo flows. These advancements align with the Kingdom's strategy to
become a global logistics hub.

### Public Transport & Urban Mobility

AI is being deployed in metro systems to predict passenger demand,
optimise schedules, and reduce energy use. The Dubai Metro integrates AI
in its signalling systems, enabling driverless train operations. In
Riyadh, the \$22 billion metro project is embedding AI for real-time
monitoring and predictive maintenance.

AI-powered ride-hailing platforms like Careem are using machine learning
for surge pricing, driver allocation, and route optimisation. Careem's
data also informs city planners on traffic bottlenecks, creating a
feedback loop between private platforms and government.

### Challenges

Despite progress, challenges remain. Autonomous vehicle rollouts face
regulatory and cultural hurdles, as well as high infrastructure costs.
Data integration across logistics chains is fragmented, with ports,
customs, and shippers often using incompatible systems. Cybersecurity
risks around transport infrastructure are also rising.

### What's Next

-   Wider adoption of **autonomous taxis, buses, and drones** across
    Gulf cities.\
-   Expansion of **AI-powered logistics corridors**, linking ports,
    airports, and free zones.\
-   Growth of **mobility-as-a-service (MaaS)** platforms powered by AI
    to integrate all transport modes.\
-   Use of **AI digital twins** to simulate and optimise entire
    transport networks before deployment.

**Key takeaway:** The Middle East is positioning itself as a global
leader in AI-enabled mobility, from autonomous vehicles in cities to
smarter global trade routes powered by AI logistics.
