# Financial Services: AI Reshaping Banking and Capital Markets

The financial services sector in the Middle East is undergoing a
profound transformation driven by AI. From retail banking and payments
to wealth management and capital markets, AI is becoming central to how
money moves, risks are managed, and customers are served. With young,
digital-savvy populations and governments prioritising fintech
innovation, the GCC is emerging as a laboratory for AI-enabled finance.

### UAE: Digital-First Banking

The UAE has positioned itself as a fintech hub, with banks like Emirates
NBD and Mashreq pioneering AI adoption. Emirates NBD's AI-powered voice
banking assistants now handle millions of customer interactions
annually, reducing call-centre pressure and improving customer
satisfaction. AI-driven fraud detection systems have cut card fraud
losses by over **20%** in pilots.

Neo-banks such as Liv (by Emirates NBD) and Mashreq Neo are integrating
AI for personalised financial advice, helping millennials and Gen Z
customers manage spending and savings goals. Dubai International
Financial Centre (DIFC) is also home to a growing ecosystem of AI-driven
fintech startups, focusing on wealthtech, regtech, and insurtech.

### Saudi Arabia: Scaling Fintech with Vision 2030

Saudi Arabia's Vision 2030 places financial sector development at its
core. Riyad Bank and Al Rajhi Bank are deploying AI in credit scoring
and risk modelling, expanding financial inclusion for younger and
underbanked Saudis. STC Pay, now one of the region's leading digital
wallets, leverages AI to monitor transactions in real time, supporting
both fraud detection and personalised offers.

The Saudi Central Bank (SAMA) is piloting AI-driven regulatory
technologies (RegTech) to monitor systemic risks. Meanwhile, the Saudi
Stock Exchange (Tadawul) has deployed AI surveillance to detect
suspicious trading activity faster and more accurately than human
monitors.

### FinTech and Islamic Finance

AI is also unlocking growth in Islamic finance, which accounts for a
significant share of the region's banking sector. Robo-advisors tailored
for Sharia-compliant investing are emerging, blending AI portfolio
optimisation with religious compliance frameworks. This allows younger
investors to access personalised wealth management at scale.

Regional fintechs such as Sarwa (UAE) and Lean Technologies (KSA) are
using AI to power robo-advisory, open banking APIs, and SME lending
platforms. With the Middle East fintech market projected to surpass
**\$3.5 billion by 2026**, AI is a key differentiator for scaling these
businesses.

### Capital Markets & Asset Management

AI is being deployed in asset management and trading across regional
funds. Predictive models are being used for equities and commodities,
particularly oil futures, which dominate Gulf markets. Bahrain and Qatar
are piloting AI-driven RegTech to automate anti-money laundering (AML)
monitoring, reducing compliance costs and improving effectiveness.

### Challenges

Despite strong growth, the sector faces challenges. Legacy IT systems in
traditional banks slow AI integration. Regulatory frameworks around AI
in credit scoring, wealth management, and trading are still developing,
creating uncertainty. Ethical questions around algorithmic bias in
lending and transparency in robo-advice remain pressing.

### What's Next

-   Expansion of **AI copilots for wealth management**, allowing retail
    and HNW customers to receive personalised, real-time advice.\
-   Growth of **sovereign Arabic-language finance models**, reducing
    reliance on foreign AI platforms.\
-   Wider adoption of **AI-powered RegTech** across the GCC, making
    compliance cheaper and more effective.\
-   Increasing role of **AI in SME finance**, providing faster credit
    scoring and customised lending to fuel entrepreneurship.

**Key takeaway:** AI is no longer optional for Middle Eastern financial
institutions. From retail banking to capital markets, it is becoming
essential infrastructure for competitiveness, trust, and growth.
