# Energy & Utilities: AI Driving Efficiency and Sustainability

The Middle East is a global energy powerhouse, and AI is increasingly
being deployed to optimise production, reduce costs, and accelerate the
shift toward renewables. National oil companies, utilities, and
regulators are all embedding AI into operations to secure long-term
energy resilience.

### AI in Oil & Gas

Saudi Aramco, the world's largest oil producer, has adopted AI across
exploration, drilling, and maintenance. Machine learning algorithms
analyse seismic data to improve exploration accuracy, while AI-powered
predictive maintenance reduces downtime in refineries and pipelines.
These initiatives are saving Aramco hundreds of millions annually.

In the UAE, ADNOC has launched its Panorama Digital Command Centre,
which integrates AI models to monitor over **10 million data points per
day**, optimising operations in real time. AI is also being deployed for
energy trading, helping companies anticipate global price shifts.

### Renewables and the Green Transition

AI is central to the Gulf's renewable ambitions. Masdar in Abu Dhabi is
using AI for solar plant performance monitoring, predicting dust
accumulation on panels and scheduling cleaning to maximise efficiency.
In Saudi Arabia, the Sakaka PV solar plant and Dumat Al Jandal wind farm
integrate AI forecasting tools to stabilise grid inputs from
intermittent renewable sources.

AI is also enabling smart grids, with DEWA (Dubai Electricity & Water
Authority) deploying AI to balance electricity loads across the city,
reducing blackouts and improving efficiency. By 2030, the GCC is
expected to deploy over **40 GW** of renewable capacity, with AI
managing integration into existing grids.

### Water & Utilities

AI is being used to monitor and predict water consumption patterns,
detect leaks, and reduce wastage. Qatar General Electricity & Water
Corporation (Kahramaa) has launched AI pilots to improve water network
resilience. With the Middle East among the most water-stressed regions
globally, such AI applications are crucial for sustainability.

### Challenges

Despite progress, challenges persist. Integrating AI into legacy oil &
gas operations requires large-scale retraining and cultural shifts. For
renewables, the lack of historical data in desert climates limits model
accuracy. Cybersecurity is also a pressing concern, with energy
infrastructure being a prime target for attacks.

### What's Next

-   Expansion of **AI-powered carbon capture and storage (CCS)**
    monitoring to help meet net-zero pledges.
-   Growth of **sovereign AI models** trained on regional energy data to
    reduce reliance on foreign providers.
-   Deployment of **AI-enabled autonomous drones and robots** for
    pipeline inspections and offshore maintenance.
-   Wider rollout of **AI-driven demand-side management**, empowering
    consumers to optimise their own energy use.

**Key takeaway:** AI is helping Middle Eastern energy players optimise
traditional assets while accelerating the transition to renewables,
ensuring the region remains a global energy leader in the AI era.
